---
title: "Frost Forge Engine #3 - Project Setup"
categories:
  - "Game Engine Development"
tags:
  - C++
  - CMake
  - Cross Platform
  - Package Management
---

So as I have wrote in previous posts, I will develop a cross platform capable game engine. Therefore I had to come up with a way to build, test and run Frost Forge on different platforms. I decided to use CMake as a build system and CPM as a package manager. I will explain what those are and how I use them in this post.
There are several other options for doing the same thing, but I don't like git submodules and other build tools because there is often to much hassle getting things up and running with certain IDE's. Plus if we are using CMake we can target different IDE's like Visual Studio, XCode and CLion.

## Tools
In the following I will explain what tools I use and why I use them. 

### CMake
CMake is a cross platform build tool that is used to generate build files for different build systems. It is used to build Frost Forge on Windows, Linux and MacOS. It is also used to build Frost Forge on different IDEs like Visual Studio, XCode and CLion. CMake is a very powerful tool and it is very easy to use. I will go through the CMakeLists.txt files later.

### CPM
CPM is a package manager for CMake. It is used to download and build dependencies for Frost Forge. It is very easy to use and it is very easy to integrate into CMake. I will go through the CPM.cmake file later. The main advantage of CPM is that we can use it to download dependencies for Frost Forge and we don't have to worry about the dependencies anymore. CPM will download the dependencies and build them for us. This makes it easier to work accross multiple platforms and with multiple people, if one might want to download and install my engine someday.

### CLion
CLion is an IDE for C++ development. It is very powerful and it is very easy to use. It is also cross platform and it is free for students.

### C++
I will use C++ as the programming language for Frost Forge, because of it's performance and it's cross platform capabilities. I will use C++20 as the standard, because it is a modern standard and it has a lot of new features that I will use in Frost Forge.

### Git
The source code of Frost Forge will be hosted on GitHub. I will use Git as a version control system. I will use Git to keep track of changes in the source code. This is mainly due to the fact that I am used to using Git and I like it.

## Project Structure
The project structure of Frost Forge is rather simple and expedient. We have a root directory that contains all basic configuration files for the repository, the IDE's and the compilers, as well as a main CMakeLists.txt file. Besides that we have two subdirectories, Editor and FrostForge. The Editor directory contains source code and libraries regarding the editor of the Frost Forge engine. The FrostForge directory contains source code and libraries regarding the engine itself. The source code of Frost Forge is split up into several subdirectories, that are named to represent their specific domains like platform, core, audio, etc. The Editor and FrostForge directories also contain a CMakeLists.txt file, that is used to build the editor and the engine respectively. The CMakeLists.txt files are explained in the next section. These CMake files are included in the main CMakeLists.txt file in the root project directory.

## Project Setup
So lets start with setting up the project, first we will create a directory on our computer name FrostForge and initialize a git repository.

```bash
mkdir FrostForge
cd FrostForge
git init
git remote add origin https://github.com/Frost-Forge-Engine/FrostForge.git
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
```

Next we create the subdirectories for the editor and the engine.

```bash
mkdir -p Editor/src Editor/test Editor/docs Editor/vendor FrostForge/src FrostForge/test FrostForge/docs FrostForge/vendor
```

Those will be empty for now but will be filled a bit later and overtime. Next we create the CMakeLists.txt files for the editor and the engine.

```bash
touch Editor/CMakeLists.txt FrostForge/CMakeLists.txt
```

### Project Dependencies
The good thing about my project setup is that we don't need to install any dependencies manually besides a compiler. If we are using a CICD pipeline (we will talk about this later) we need to install a compiler and cmake but this is easy.

Compilers that are supported by Frost Forge are:
- MSVC (Visual Studio)
- Clang (XCode, CLion)
- GCC (CLion)

#### Clang installation (Linux)
```bash
sudo apt update -y
sudo apt install clang -y
```

#### GCC installation (Linux)
```bash
sudo apt update -y
sudo apt install build-essential -y
```

I will not explain how to install a compiler on Windows or MacOS, because it is very easy to do and there are a lot of tutorials on the internet.

### Editor CMakelists.txt

Let's start with the CMakeLists.txt file for the editor. We will start with the minimum required CMake version and the project name.

```cmake
project (Editor)

set(CPM_DOWNLOAD_VERSION 0.27.2) 
set(CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION "${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/cmake/CPM_${CPM_DOWNLOAD_VERSION}.cmake")

if(NOT (EXISTS ${CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION}))
    message(STATUS "Downloading CPM.cmake")
    file(DOWNLOAD https://github.com/TheLartians/CPM.cmake/releases/download/v${CPM_DOWNLOAD_VERSION}/CPM.cmake ${CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION})
endif()

include(${CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION})

# Add CPMPackages for editor here with CPMAddPackage(NAME <PackageName> VERSION <Version> GITHUB_REPOSITORY <GitRepository> GIT_TAG <GitTag>)
# Example: CPMAddPackage(NAME Warlock VERSION 0.0.1 GITHUB_REPOSITORY TheLartians/Warlock)

# Collect all source files
file(GLOB SOURCES CONFIGURE_DEPENDS
    src/*.cpp
)

add_executable(FrostForge-Editor SOURCES)

# Link libraries for editor here
target_link_libraries(FrostForge-Editor
    PRIVATE 
        FrostForge
)
```

So what did I write there. First I created a new CMake project called Editor, then I set the C++ standard to 20 and enabled the standard enforcement. After that I disabled extensions as we don't need them. Next I installed CPM as our package manager if it doesn't exist already. Then we install some 3rd party dependencies if we need them. After that I defined a list of all the source files that exist in the editor project. Next I defined a new Executable, this is a binary file that can be executed. I called it FrostForge-Editor and I added all source files in the src directory to it. After that I linked the FrostForge library and our 3rd party dependencies to the editor. The FrostForge library is the engine itself and it will be explained later.

### Engine CMakeLists.txt
Now lets look at the CMakeLists.txt file for the engine.

```cmake
project( FrostForge )

set(CPM_DOWNLOAD_VERSION 0.27.2) 
set(CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION "${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/cmake/CPM_${CPM_DOWNLOAD_VERSION}.cmake")

if(NOT (EXISTS ${CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION}))
    message(STATUS "Downloading CPM.cmake")
    file(DOWNLOAD https://github.com/TheLartians/CPM.cmake/releases/download/v${CPM_DOWNLOAD_VERSION}/CPM.cmake ${CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION})
endif()

include(${CPM_DOWNLOAD_LOCATION})

# Add Global variables

# Add CPMPackages for editor here with CPMAddPackage(NAME <PackageName> VERSION <Version> GITHUB_REPOSITORY <GitRepository> GIT_TAG <GitTag>)
# Example: CPMAddPackage(NAME FrostForge VERSION 0.0.1 GITHUB_REPOSITORY TheLartians/FrostForge)

# Add Sources
file(GLOB SOURCES CONFIGURE_DEPENDS
    src/*.cpp
)

# Create Library
add_library(FrostForge
    STATIC
        ${SOURCES}
)

## Link external libraries
target_link_libraries(FrostForge
    PUBLIC
)

## Add pre-compiled headers
target_precompile_headers(FrostForge
    PUBLIC
        FrostForgePCH.h
)

## Add include directories
target_include_directories(FrostForge
    PUBLIC
        src
    PRIVATE
        vendor/*
)
```

As you can see the engine CMakeLists.txt file is a bit more complicated, so let's go through it step by step. I created a new Project called FrostForge. After that I disabled extensions as we don't need them. Next I added some global variables, for now those will be empty and will be filled later on. After that I added the external dependencies, this we will do with CPM. Then I added the sources, those are empty for now because we don't have any sources yet and will be filled in the process. After that I created a new library called FrostForge and added all the sources to it. Next I linked the external dependencies to the library. After that I added pre-compiled headers to the library. This will be explained later. Finally I added the include directories to the library. This will also be explained later.

### Main CMakeLists.txt
Now we have to create the main CMakeLists.txt file. This file will be used to bundle the editor and the engine cmake files.

```cmake
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.5)
project(Warlock_Engine VERSION 0.0.1 LANGUAGES CXX)

## 64 Bit Check
if(NOT CMAKE_SIZEOF_VOID_P MATCHES 8)
    message(FATAL_ERROR "Warlock Engine only supports 64-bit builds.")
endif()

## OS Check for builds on different 
if("${CMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME}" STREQUAL "Windows")
	set(OS_WINDOWS 1)
elseif("${CMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME}" STREQUAL "Darwin")
	set(OS_MACOSX 1)
elseif("${CMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME}" STREQUAL "Linux")
    set(OS_Linux 1)
endif()

set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD 20)
set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD_REQUIRED ON)
set(CMAKE_CXX_EXTENSIONS OFF)

add_subdirectory(Warlock)
add_subdirectory(Warlock_Editor)
```

As you can see this file is fairly simple, we tell cmake which version we require minimum. Then we set the overall project name, version and language. After that we check if the build is 64 bit, if not we throw an error. Then we check which operating system we are building on and set a variable for it. After that we set the C++ standard to 20 and enable the standard enforcement. After that we add the engine and the editor as subdirectories.

The OS check is not necessary but it is a good practice to check which operating system you are building on. This is because some libraries are only available on certain operating systems. For now this will do nothing but we will need this later on.

### Other files
Now we have to create some other files. Those are the .editorconfig, .gitattributes and .gitignore files. I will not go about the details of the .gitignore file because it is simply to large for here. The .editorconfig file is used to define the coding style for the project. The .gitattributes file is used to define the line endings for the project. I will not go into detail about those files because they are not important for the engine itself.