---
title: "Frost Forge Engine #2 - Engine Architecture"
categories:
  - "Game Engine Development"
tags:
  - C++
  - CMake
  - Cross Platform
  - Package Management
---

One of the best ways to get into game engine architecture is to read Jason Gregory's book [Game Engine Architecture](https://www.gameenginebook.com/) in which he goes through the architecture of a game engine from scratch. I've been reading it for a while now and I've decided to write a series of posts about my own game engine architecture. I'll be using the Frost Forge Engine as an example, but the concepts should be applicable to any game engine.

Jason is writing about how a AAA grade game engine is typically architected. Some might think: "Is it necessary to do architecture when im only writing an indie game engine?". Good Question in my opinion yes, this will help you with overall better code, better readability, better structure and better performance. Typical game engines come with a layered architecture, so lets see what those are.

1. Hardware Layer
2. Driver Layer
3. OS Layer
4. 3rd Party SDK Layer
5. Platform Independence Layer (Platform Layer)
6. Core Systems Layer
7. Resource Management Layer
8. Renderer Layer, Profiling & Debugging Layer, Collision & Physics Layer, Human Interface Device Layer
9. Scene Graph Layer, VFX Layer, Animation Layer, Multiplayer Layer, Audio Layer
10. Frontend Layer, Gameplay Foundation Layer
11. Game Specific Systems

The Hardware, Driver and OS layer are mostly out of our controll because they are determined which computer and OS we use and what drivers they come with. The 3rd party SDK Layer is the first layer we have control over, there we can determine our 3rd party libraries, if we choose to use any. The platform independence layer helps us abstracting functionality away that is platform specific so the game engine is cross platform compatible and independent internally. The core systems layer is the heart of the game engine, it contains the core functionality of the game engine. The resource management layer is responsible for loading and managing resources like textures, meshes, sounds, etc. The renderer layer is responsible for rendering the scene and handling graphics. The profiling and debugging layer is responsible for profiling and debugging the game engine so that we have an easy way to find errors. The collision and physics layer is responsible for collision and physics in our game world. The human interface device layer is responsible for input, like mouse, keyboard and gamepads. The scene graph layer is responsible for the scene graph. The VFX layer is responsible for visual effects, the animation layer is responsible for animation of any kind like skeletal or sprite animation. The multiplayer layer is responsible for multiplayer handling, this is optional, if you dont want to support multiplayer you dont have to implement this. The audio layer is responsible for audio and SFX. The frontend layer is responsible for the frontend of the game engine, like GUI handling. The gameplay foundation layer is responsible for the gameplay foundation of the game engine, here you will typically see things like ECS (Entity Component System), Scripting Systems and Event Systems. The game specific systems layer is responsible for the game specific systems of the game engine, this is not really part of the engine anymore and much more an implementation that is using the engine.

Apart from some parts this is pretty much set in stone because those layers are describing systems that are needed in every game engine. The only thing that is not set in stone is the 3rd party SDK layer and the multiplayer layer, you can choose to use any 3rd party libraries you want, but you dont have to use any. You can also choose to implement your own libraries for some of the layers, but this is not recommended because you will have to maintain those libraries yourself and you will have to implement a lot of functionality that is already implemented in 3rd party libraries.

## What is Frost Engines Architecture?
Well pretty much the described above is what I'm going to go with. My implementation will be specific for 2D game engines though but this doesn't affect the overall architecture. We will go through the different layers as we develop the engine and I will explain what each layer is responsible for and how it is implemented. Keep in mind the architecture that I'm describing here is pretty much as high level as it gets, so we will delve much more into the details as we go along.

So thats it for today my friends see you in upcoming posts.