---
title: "Frost Forge Engine #1 - Engine Design"
categories:
  - "Game Engine Development"
tags:
  - C++
  - CMake
  - Cross Platform
  - Package Management
---

Welcome back my friends. So today we will look into setting up a Game Engine Project. First of all we should think about a few points that will make us our lives 
easier down the road before we get to working on the code.

1. What type of engine do you want to build ?
2. What 3rd Party dependencies do we want/have ?
3. Should the engine be Cross Platform capable ?
4. Should the engine be CICD capable ?
5. Should the engine be compatible with multiple IDE's ?

So in order to answer those Questions for your self let's try to go through them while designing my Frost Forge Engine.

## 1. What type of engine do you want to build ?
For me it is an 2D engine of course, if you read my last post I wrote about this. I want to build mainly 2D RPG and MMORPG games with my own engine. It should be possible to develop on Windows, Linux and MacOS.
I want sound, physics, and a user and developer friendly code. So with this MVP we will go on our journey.

## 2. What 3rd Party dependencies do we want/have ?
Well this is a question that has certainly now right or wrong answer. You can develop an entire engine without any 3rd party dependencies at all if you want. That would be kinde hard mode though.
Let's think about this in a different way, what does an engine typically consist of ? There is a lot so look at the list below

1. Graphics Engine
2. Animations
3. Sound
4. Logging and Debugging
5. Math Engine
6. Physics Engine
7. GUI
8. Networking
9. Resource Management
10. Scene Graph
11. Entity Component System
12. Input, Windows, Filesystem Abstraction

So you see there is a lot and that is really a minimal top down view, so there would be a lot more the deeper you go the rabbit hole. 
We could develop all this our self or we can aknowledge that there is a lot of smart people out there that have done this job already for us and we can use their libraries to fasten our development process.

Well lets look at Frost Forge, what dependencies do I plan to use ? For this let us step through the list above and look what we can use for dependencies.
1. Graphics - OpenGL, Vulkan, DirektX12
2. Animations - no dependency needed for Frost Forge
3. Sound - OpenAL
4. Logging and Debugging - SpdLog
5. Math Engine - GLM
6. Physics Engine - Box2D
7. Gui - ImGui
8. Networking - Boost.Asio, MySQL++
9. Resource Management - yaml-cpp, stb-image
10. Entity Component System - EnTT
11. Input, Windows, Filesystem Abstraction - GLFW

If you set out with the goal to make an engine with cross-platform capabilities, start thinking early about that, if you put a dependency in your project that can't be run for example on MacOS and you realize this late, than you have to work around this problems and that is a big pain.

## 3. Should the engine be cross platform capable
In my case yes, but what should be the minimal supported list of platforms ? For this let's look at what is most used. If you research this you will see that Windows is the most used platform in game and game engine development. That does make sense because most gamers, play their games on windows machines.
So we should atleast support Windows, everything else is personal preference, as I explained in my last post, I have a use case for Linux because of my computer setup.

But how can we setup our engine from the get go to be cross-platform compatible ? CMake is the answer here. Cmake is a build system that is able to build your projects on Windows, MacOS and Linux. With CMake you can configure your project, how it should be build and linked, you can choose what dependencies you want to be installed and much more like writing and executing tests.
So CMake it is I guess, don't bother with anything else really, I made this mistake in the beginning to. This will only make you wonder why your project is suddenly not building anymore just because your other tool of choice (like Premake5 for example) suddenly has a platform specific error ....

## 4. Should the engine be CICD capable ?
I guess some of you might ask what even is CICD ? To say this without the fancy buzzwords and marketing stuff: it automates tasks for you that you normally would do manually over and over again. Sounds nice doesn't it ? I can assure you it is. So if we use CMake we are already CICD capable because we can run all commands we need in a commandline (shell).
We can even build executables for Windows, Linux and MacOS in our CICD Pipelines if we want (and we want). So where can we build up our CICD Pipeline ? Every place we want, but the most interesting platforms in my opinion are, Github Actions, Gitlab CI and Jenkins. Why ? Because first of all they are free to use, easy to configure and you can build your CICD pipeline as code and check it in with the engine source code.

## 5. Should the engine be compatible with multiple IDE's ?
The simple and short answer is - yes. But how do we do that ? CMake to the rescue, if you want to programm in CLion use CMake to generate a Ninja project, you want to use Visual Studio ? No problem let CMake generate you a solution for your Visual Studio version. This works for many more, if you want to look up what CMake is capable of I highly recommend that you look up the CMake [documentation](https://cmake.org/documentation/).
